# On Risk

To most people the work "risk" conjures visions of a high-stakes blackjack game
in Vegas, or cliff diving in Acapulco. To say that something is "at risk" means
it demands intervention or bad things surely follow. Humans are story-tellers by
nature and we especially love a morality tale. The iron law of narrative demands
that a bad result follows a bad intention. The larger the tragedy, the worse the
intention. Thus, we judge the drunk driver who kills a pedestrian more harshly
than the drunk driver who merely wrecks his own car. We judge the action based
on the outcome. Poker players call this "resulting" and train themselves not to
do it.[^duke]

Every project is an experiment that samples random variables in time, space, and
money. No two are alike, so we cannot know the true distribution of those random
variables. To make it harder still, the variables interrelate, but nobody can be
quite sure how they affect each other.


Suppose we play darts together and I propose this game: We draw a vertical line
on the dartboard. You will be blindfolded when you throw a dart. It must hit to
the left of the vertical line. The closer it is to the line, the more you win.
It can go a few inches to the left, but go too far left and you get nothing. If
it goes even one millimeter to the right of the line, you lose. How much would
you be willing to bet on this game? Not much, I suspect. This is project
management as traditionally defined. The game is called "ship it." If you hit
the date, you win (regardless of how valuable the resulting system may be.) If
you deliver too early then you were sandbagging and you lose. Deliver too late,
even if the system is much more valuable than originally thought, and you lose.

In physics and statistics, there is an idea of "expected value." The name might
be a little misleading, since it generally is *not* the value you actually
expect to get... at least if you only do the experiment once. "Expected value"
of a random variable is the weighted average you would measure over many, many
trials. If we flip a fair coin, with "tails" worth zero and "heads" worth one,
then the expected value of that process is 0.5. (Even though no single flip
could possibly give us a fractional result.) Let's extend that from a coin to a
wheel. The wheel has 100 divisions, each numbered sequentially from one to 100.
We can't predict the result of any particular spin, but we can say something
about the average of all spins. Over a large enough number of spins it should
converge toward the expected value of 50.5. We get that by dividing each outcome
by it's likelihood, then summing up all the parts, which we then divide by the
number of parts.

We use the expected value to talk about the future. We don't know exactly what
will happen when rolling dice or running projects. Instead, we use the expected
value as a way of saying, "here's the most likely result." It's an informed
guess that we call an "estimate." Through organizational transmogrification, the
estimate becomes a plan, which becomes a budget, which becomes a deadline. But
that's like saying the coin must come up with a value of 0.5 in one flip, or you
lose. Start with a random process, talk about it in summary terms, then get held
to that summary so your annual evaluation depends on hitting it as a target. No
wonder most of our projects "fail."

[^duke]: Annie Duke, "Thinking in Bets"
